TRANSCRIPT
Hiding a smile in the shadows. I'm Bob Hirshon and this is Science Update.
Leonardo da Vinci's famous painting has inspired romantic songs and art lovers the world over, who become captivated by the Mona Lisa's
enigmatic smile.
The portrait also intrigued Margaret Livingstone, a neurobiologist at Harvard Medical School who studies the human visual system. When she
looked at the painting a few years ago, Livingstone noticed the Mona Lisa's changing expression.
Livingstone:
It was very clear to me that when I looked at her mouth, she wasn't smiling as much as when I looked at her eyes.
Later, she realized what was happening. Livingstone says our peripheral vision sees blurry images while our central vision sees fine detail.
When Livingstone blurred the face with a filter, the Mona Lisa looked as if she were smiling cheerfully. But homing in on the fine detail gave her
a more demure expression.
So Livingstone says that in his painting, da Vinci achieved an unusual effect: the Mona Lisa's smile changes depending on where you look.
For the American Association for the Advancement of Science, I'm Bob Hirshon.

MAKING SENSE OF THE RESEARCH
Artists make a career out of manipulating our perception. Usually, the manipulation is on an emotional and psychological level. But often, artists manipulate
what we see in strictly physical ways as well: for example, by carefully creating the illusion of 3-D perspective on a flat surface. And as this study shows,
artists can sometimes manipulate our perception in ways that even they aren't aware of.
Leonardo da Vinci had a great scientific mind, but even he couldn't have known the real secret behind the Mona Lisa's smile. The proper understanding of
the human visual system was still centuries away. Still, he knew that he pulled some kind of neat trick; the painting was one of his personal favorites and
he gave it to the king of France as a gift.
Livingstone's research is based on differences in spatial frequency perception within the eye. Spatial frequency is basically a measure of how detailed an
image is. A good example of spatial frequency is right on your computer. Images on a computer screen are made up of pixels (tiny dots of colored light).
Pictures with higher spatial frequency (in other words, more pixels crammed into every square inch) are sharper and more detailed than pictures with lower
spatial frequency.
The tricky concept here is that different parts of your eye are actually "tuned in" to different spatial frequencies. Anything you look at has both high and
low spatial frequency patterns, layered on top of each other—and what you see depends on how you look at it.
To get a sense of this, pick an object in the room, like a picture. Look at it out of the corner of your eye. It's kind of blurry, right? Now look straight at it. It
snaps into focus. That's because you can see high spatial frequencies (fine details) with your central vision, but not low spatial frequencies (broad, blurry
patterns). The opposite is true of your peripheral vision (the stuff outside the center of your gaze).